# Generic template in LaTeX for the first submission of an academic manuscript

## Tower of First-Submission Babel

A point of perpetual confusion for me is that the availability of style files for LaTeX for various Academic journals implies that you should prepare your first submission using the official template.
This is not true, and this is much more trouble than it is worth, especially if your manuscript is rejected, as most are.
Journal  configurations vary widely between journals: It can be much harder to reformat a manuscript than it may appear at first sight.

Instead, you only need to submit your first submission as a PDF.
You might as well use a format for that first submission that is easy for reviewers to read and edit when printed out.
It should also be simple for you to assemble.

(I know; you could format it for BioArxiv in LaTeX. 
This step seems to be part of the workflow of many. 
It is not part of mine yet.)

## Solution: a generic template for the first submission

This GitHub repository is for a generic journal article template (main.tex) that I use to prepare my first submission of a manuscript as a LaTeX document.
I used one extra file for styling the bibliography, spbasic.bst.
The template includes examples of the following elements:

- figure
- tables
- equations
- code block
- bibtex file

Delete the boilerplate that you do not need and fill out the sections with your amazing results and submit.

### Note for org-mode users

Wouter Spekkink has written a detailed [blog post](http://www.wouterspekkink.org/academia/writing/tool/doom-emacs/2021/02/27/writing-academic-papers-with-org-mode.html) about writing an academic article in org-mode and then exporting it to LaTeX.
Org-mode users like to be able to fold sections.
You can do that to LaTeX section in Overleaf.
He claims that LaTeX's markup is distracting.
He is right about that when it comes to tables, but I think that the LaTeX markup is minimal for the vast majority of the document.
He is also right about the exporting from org through LaTeX to PDF being seemless because it requires one command.
Although in AUCTeX, this can be painless too.
Nonetheless, I will develop a org variant for org-mode users.


## Features

The features of the template are as follows:

- A 7 x 9 inch geometry for the active text area.
- Double-spacing.
- Line numbers in the main document body.
- Automated page numbering.
- Generic Title page formatting with affiliations for multiple authors.
- Use of a global.bib file rather than bibitems to assemble the bibliography.
- Use of the booktabs library for pretty tables even if I have to downgrade them on the final submission with the journal's style file.
- A list of tables is autogenerated.
- Use of the graphicx package to import images.
- Support for including figures in an old fashioned Figure section rather than embedding the figures in the text. You can navigate instantly to a figure via hyperlinked labels. A list of figures is autogenerated.
- Support for including tables in a Tables section.
- Reminders (i.e., do not forget to spell out the hypothesis in the Introduction) of what should go where in a deleteable or foldable comment.
- Support for equation typesetting in a custom environment that supports captions.
- Support for syntax highlighting of code blocks and the use of captions for each code block.

After your paper is accepted, you can reformat it to comply with the Journal's style.
LaTeX template and style files can be found on the Journal's website.
The Overleaf.com site has a gallery of journal article templates that run on Overleaf.

## Complementary writing tools available at github.com/MooersLab

### Writing Log

See this [site](https://github.com/MooersLab/writingLogTemplate) for a template for a place to think about and track your progress on your writing project.
I store the writing log in the same folder as all of the files for my writing project.

### Annotated Bibliography

See this [site](https://github.com/MooersLab/annotatedBibliography) for a template to create an annotated bibliography in LateX. 
This is a good place to store your notes from your reading of the literature.
I store the annotated bibliography in a subfolder in the same folder as all of the files for my writing project.

### Slideshow Template

See this [site](https://github.com/MooersLab/slideshowTemplateLaTeX) for a template to create a slideshow to advertise your manuscript.


### Diary for 2022 in LaTeX

[See](https://github.com/MooersLab/diary2022inLaTeX). Can serve many related purposes.

### Diary for 2023 in LaTeX

[See](https://github.com/MooersLab/diary2023inLaTeX). Can serve many related purposes.

### latex-emacs

See this [site](https://github.com/MooersLab/latex-emacs) for a latex-emacs configuration file.
This configuration allows you to run Emacs with LaTeX in isolation of your main configuration.

### snippet-latex-mode

See this [site](https://github.com/MooersLab/snippet-latex-mode) for a collection of yasnippet snippets for latex-mode in Emacs.
These extend the default set.

### emacs-quizzes

Improve your recall of Emacs commands in a few minutes a day thanks spaced repetition. 
The [site](https://github.com/MooersLab/qemacs) has a set of fill in the blank quizzes.

### LaTeX in Emacs

Learn about how to use [LaTeX in Emacs](https://github.com/MooersLab/BerlinEmacsAugust2022) via a slides that I presented at the Berlin Emacs Meetup 31 August 2022.
This talk was not recorded.

### GhostText

Edit text areas in a web browser from your [favorite text editor](https://github.com/MooersLab/DSW22ghosttext).
The text area can be the opened tex file on Overleaf.
This talk was recorded: See the corresponding [video](https://mediasite.ouhsc.edu/Mediasite/Channel/python/watch/4da0872f028c4255ae12935655e911321d).

### The Writer's Law

Some [guidelines](https://github.com/MooersLab/thewriterslaw) to productive writing.

